relative impact of print and database products on
    database producer expenses and income-trends for database
    producer organizations based on a thirteen year financial
    analysis. a 13-year analysis of the finances of a major data
    base producer organisation, which is also a publisher of
    abstracting and indexing products, indicates trends regarding
    the impact that both printed products and data base products
    have on the financial status of the organisation. the question
    of 'migration' (from printed to on-line data base products) and
    the fact that expenses have increased more than income are
    discussed as they relate to the survival or growth of data base
    organisations. since the data base has gone on-line, there have
    been significant increases in the data base revenue, connect
    hours, and numbers of on-line users. at the same time, there
    have been decreases in the number of data base leases and
    licences, the number of print product subscriptions, and the
    excess of income over expenses. in consta nt dollars, the cost
    of producing an abstract has decreased, the subscription charge
    for printed products has increased only slightly, the lease and
    license fees have decreased, royalty charges have increased,
    and hourly connect fees have remained steady (even though the
    size of the on-line file has increased greatly). the problem is
    that of maintaining a balanced financial status in light of
    increased income from one class of products, decreased income
    from another class of products, and increased cost of
    operation. possible approaches to ensure economic viability are
    considered in terms of expenses, efficiency of operation,
    marketing, products, services, and pricing. the most promising
    approaches lie in the areas of pricing and development of new
    products and servi ces. the possibility of developing a
    consortium of data base producers for offering on-line services
    is proposed. there appears to be no alternative to increasing
    the prices for on-line users.